# Identification of Influential Genes and Prognostic Biomarkers of Colorectal Cancer Using Bioinformatics and Machine Learning Approaches

## Humayan Kabir Rana <sup>a,b</sup>, and Boshir Ahmed <sup>a</sup>
### <sup>a</sup>Dept. of CSE, Rajshahi University of Engineering & Technology (RUET), Rajshahi, Bangladesh <br> <sup>b</sup>Dept. of CSE, Green University of Bangladesh, Narayanganj-1461, Dhaka, Bangladesh
##
### Abstract: 
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second leading cause of cancer deaths, and its incidence is rising consistently over time. The identification of influential genes plays a significant role in diagnosing and developing effective therapeutic strategies for cancer. Several research studies have been conducted to identify the influential genes of CRC, but it is still not sufficient, and more research is required in this area. Therefore, this study aimed to identify the influential genes of CRC using the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) dataset, applying the Kruskal-Wallis test and Bonferroni correction techniques. Our model identified 9 influential genes from 20518 genes of CRC, namely TRPA1, STAC2, SOX11, PPFIA4, NPR3, MLH1, KRAS, GRP, and CALB2. Moreover, we employed bioinformatics approaches to analyze signaling and ontological pathways, protein-protein interactions, transcription factor-gene interactions, and gene–microRNA interactions to elucidate the functional significance of these influential genes. We found 9 key signaling pathways, 12 ontological pathways, 5 hub genes, 14 transcription factors, and 13 miRNAs as significant for CRC. Afterward, we applied the Cox proportional hazards (CoxPH) model and Kaplan-Meier (KM) estimator to predict the survival probabilities of the influential genes. The influential genes showed a high hazard ratio and a low survival probability in the survival analysis. We employed benchmark databases (OMIM, dbGaP, and DisGeNET) and receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis to validate the findings of our study.  In the ROC analysis, the influential genes demonstrated satisfactory area under the curve (AUC) values, especially the gene MLH1 achieved the highest AUC of .91. Lastly, we recommended some chemical compounds that could potentially be considered for the treatment of CRC. In fine, the outcomes of our study would be used for CRC diagnosis and would be employed in lab-based research to develop potential therapeutic targets for the treatment of CRC.

# Dataset used: [Download Dataset](https://www.cbioportal.org/study/summary?id=coadread_tcga_pan_can_atlas_2018)
